Good afternoon.
Last year at WWDC, if you remember,
we had a little surprise for you.
That's, of course, when we announced our
switch to Intel processors.
And after the conference,
all my colleagues at Apple went
back to Cupertino and worked really
hard for a number of months to
be able to surprise you again.
And that was at Macworld,
when Paul Ottolini, the CEO of Intel,
came on stage to hand the
symbolic wafer to Steve.
And after that, back to work.
And in the months that followed,
with pretty good regularity,
we turned the entire line,
so that as of this morning,
the transition is complete.
Now, we could not have done such
transition in so little time if
Paul Ottolini had not been there.
We didn't have a vertically integrated
company where hardware and software
work hand-in-hand to make it happen.
So we design the hardware,
we design the software, and all together,
that brings a tremendous user experience.
That's our goal.
That's our mission.
So this integration of hardware and
software is going to drive the agenda
today for the State of the Union.
We'll start with hardware topics,
things like the CPU, memories, GPU,
all those things.
And from those topics,
we'll move on to the
software implications.
So, at the heart of a computer...
You have, of course, the CPU.
And our latest addition is a 64-bit CPU.
So to talk about the CPU,
I'd like to welcome on
stage Simon Patience,
who is VP of CoreOS.
Good afternoon.
Well, it seems appropriate that somebody
from the core of the software
operating system should be coming
here to talk to you about the CPU,
which is the core of the
hardware of the machine.
So I'd like to start this talk with
a little trip down memory lane.
And processors originally had
a word width of four bits,
which was clearly not enough.
And so fairly quickly we moved
through the 8-bit processors.
16 seemed to be a reasonable amount,
but that didn't last for that long
until finally we settled on 32.
And 32-bit processors have been in use
now for 20 years and have done us well.
But more recently,
we've moved ahead and to 64-bit
processors with the introduction
of the G5 and of the Xeon,
as you heard this morning.
So why would we want to go to 64-bit?
Well, there's a number of reasons.
The first is computational speed.
We have an instruction
set that's optimized,
that doesn't have the legacy
baggage that it has to carry on,
and so can be highly performant and fast.
On Intel,
we also have many more registers
than we had previously,
and that means fewer memory references,
and that in itself is a major
performance improvement.
The second reason is that we have a
much larger virtual address space.
Now, for people who have large data sets,
that's very important.
There's no data window
moving across your data set,
which makes it more efficient
because there's no remapping,
but also it's a lot simpler.
In addition,
with a large virtual address space
comes a large physical address space,
lots of RAM in our machines.
And if we look at the historical
trends of our machines,
this is the maximal configuration that
you can buy from Apple over the years.
You can see we've been stuck
underneath that red line.
That's the 4 gigabyte or 32-bit physical
boundary until we had the introduction
of the G5 and now suddenly our physical
memory configurations have leapt up.
So where are we?
So in Tiger on PowerPC 64-bit,
we have a 64-bit virtual
address space for applications.
We use the industry standard
programming model LP64,
that's 64-bit longs and pointers.
And we introduced a single binary
package that allowed you to take a 32-bit
executable and a 64-bit executable,
put them in the same package,
which you could then install
anywhere and it would run.
And we were targeting the Unix
application or command line for 64 bits.
So if we look at our software stack,
then for Tiger, this is the target,
it was Unix.
Now that was for PowerPC.
Now today we've announced the
Intel Xeon in the Mac Pro,
and we have the exact same functionality.
We have the Unix functionality,
64-bit libraries for
Intel and for the PowerPC.
So that's Tiger.
So what about Leopard?
Well,
we go look at our software stack again.
This is the software stack and
we've extended the 64-bit support
all the way up the software stack.
So we now have full 64-bit application
support including Carbon and Cocoa.
Now just like the 64-bit processors
have managed to lose a little bit
of legacy in their instructions
when they went to 64-bit,
we're losing a little bit of legacy also.
So there's no 64-bit quick draw,
but we do have the
modern courts framework.
There's no 64-bit
low-level QuickTime APIs,
but we have QtKit providing
that functionality.
No 64-bit sound manager?
Core Audio does that for you.
And finally, there's no 64-bit CFM,
and we have no replacement,
and we don't believe that's a problem.
So I'd like to dispel a little myth
that is that 64-bit is always faster.
Now, 32-bit has smaller
fundamental data types.
And so sometimes it can be faster
because you have a smaller heap,
a smaller footprint,
less memory pressure on the system.
So it's a trade-off,
and you have to work out what is correct.
But we have tools for 64-bit ready
to go for both PowerPC and for Intel.
We have this new little
pull-down panel here,
which allows you to specify whether
you want to build for a 64-bit
or a 32-bit or both application.
And so what I'd like to do now is to
show you a little bit about what a
64-bit application could do for you.
Okay, I have this project here.
Let's quickly look at the targets.
You can see actually we're building both
a 32-bit version and a 64-bit version.
This is the new pull-down panel.
So what I'll do now is I'll launch the
32-bit version of this application.
So what this application does is
it processes a four gigabyte file
of DNA data and is actually using
that data to render an image of the
helix or various images of the helix.
Now this file is too big to fit
into a 32-bit address space,
so we're having to move an
address window across it.
And it's also very compute
intensive and very memory intensive.
So you can see it's pretty slow.
So let's launch the 64-bit
version of the same app.
So the 64-bit version,
the entire file is able
to be mapped into memory,
so there's no remapping of a window.
We're running on the Mac Pro on
this with 8 gigabytes of memory,
so we can actually put all of
the file into physical memory,
which is helping the 64-bit application,
but doesn't appear to be
helping the 32-bit version.
And the compiler is taking full
advantage of the additional registers
to help speed the operations.
So this will take about 47
seconds to do all the frames,
all 27 frames, and the 32-bit version
might get through two,
if we're lucky, in the same time frame.
So the 64-bit version is benefiting
from the optimized instruction set,
from the large virtual address
space being able to map the file,
and the large physical address space
to get the file into memory in one go.
So there's the authors.
We're not even past number two yet.
OK, so there's 64 bits.
So does this mean that you all
want to rush out and convert
your applications to 64 bits?
Well, you really
want to only consider 64-bit if you have
a computationally intensive application
and you have a large data set that you
need to work on and you're targeting
one of the 64-bit capable machines.
So that's a relatively small set
of people that really need the
64-bit capabilities and you have
to remember that we have a lot
of 32-bit machines to target.
So that's 64-bit.
We have the 64-bit hardware
in the Mac Pro available.
We have 64-bit tools available.
And we have the full 64-bit
software stack available.
And so now it's for you to get
your 64-bit apps onto the platform.
So we move on to the
next aspect of the CPU.
This is also a revolutionary
change in the industry.
So now I'd like to talk about multicores.
So this morning we announced the Mac Pro.
This has a multicore Xeon processor.
Now, multicore is an industry-wide trend,
and so I'd like to talk a little bit
about why we're doing this and what
it means to us as software developers.
So, looking back,
what we've been doing with
single cores is just relying
on increasing clock speed.
Now this has been great for
application developers because
you don't have to do anything,
right?
You wait for the next
processor to come along,
the clock speeds faster,
your application,
no change to the binary,
just runs faster too.
Unfortunately,
in order to be able to increase
the clock speed like this,
there are some ramifications to that.
So the way that we've been increasing the
clock speed is through miniaturization.
When you miniaturize, unfortunately,
you increase the amount
of power consumption,
and when you increase
the power consumption,
you also increase the generation of heat,
which you then have to
get out of the machine.
And this is going up exponentially
and is causing significant problems.
So what's the solution?
So if we look at a single processor,
this is a single-chord processor,
fully clocked,
the performance meter is set at 100,
and our power consumption
meter is also set at 100.
So what we'll do is we'll increase the
clock speed by 20% and see what happens.
So we've got a nice 13%
increase in performance.
That's good.
We like increasing performance.
But it comes at a cost of a 73%
increase in power consumption,
which is not good because there's
all the heat that goes with that,
too.
So instead of doing that,
instead of increasing
the clock frequency,
let's decrease it and see what happens.
So we've lost that 13% performance gain,
and in fact we've lost more compared
to the single cord processor.
So that's bad,
but look at the power consumption.
Our power consumption has
dropped to 49% of what the fully
clocked processor would be.
So what we'll do is we'll take this core,
we'll add another one,
and we'll make it a dual
core and see what happens.
So now we have a 73% increase in
computing throughput on a dual core
processor with that clocked down chip
compared to the fully clocked processor.
And only a 2% increase in power.
And this is ignoring any advances
in microprocessor technology,
which of course is happening.
And so this is why we're going dual core.
For small power changes, if any,
we can get significant increases
in computing throughput.
So how do we use this performance?
I mean,
it was simple in the single-chord world,
where we just do nothing and wait
for the processor to speed us up.
But this is a second processor in here.
Well, we have options.
We can do nothing, again.
We can use threads.
Or we can adopt some new APIs.
So let's talk through those.
First of all,
let's talk about doing nothing.
But how can you do nothing?
We've got an extra core.
Well,
the reason you can do nothing is because
the OS has done the hard work for you.
During Tiger,
we went through the whole of the kernel,
we put fine-grain locking
throughout the kernel,
so the kernel is now highly
concurrent and parallel.
And at the heart of Mac OS X,
we have a fully SMP-capable Unix system.
In addition,
while your application is running,
there's some other system activity that,
on a single processor,
you are having to compete for.
So there's various daemons and other
utilities going on in the system.
With a dual core,
these can be going on in the second core,
while your application now has
the full core at its disposal.
Mac OS X also has a client
server architecture.
So services that you're requesting
from the operating system are
frequently done by daemons or
other processes in the system.
These can now run on the other
core while your application is
still making forward progress.
We also have some threaded frameworks.
So some of the APIs that you use are
[Transcript missing]
So even if you do nothing,
you get an automatic
performance improvement.
It's not great,
but it's good for nothing.
It's good for doing nothing,
I should say.
I knew I had to make one mistake.
So that's the do-nothing option.
The second option is to use threads.
Many of you already have
threaded applications,
and many of you may be going
towards threaded applications,
so we'll talk about
that for a little bit.
But there's an art to multi-threading,
and it's not a simple thing to do.
A lot of applications are broken
down using functional decomposition.
You use one thread to perform
one part of the activity,
another thread to do something different.
But much of the concurrency is
actually around access to data.
And, of course,
access to data in a multi-processor
world is all about locks.
And the big question is,
how many locks do you use?
Do you use a few big locks,
a lot of small locks?
And the answer is,
there is no single answer.
So it's all about profiling your
application and looking to see
where you're getting concurrency,
where there's contention on the locks,
and so forth.
And it's a lot of work.
You also have to worry about deadlocks.
You don't want deadlocks in your system,
so you have to start
planning lock hierarchies.
And being able to debug those
is also incredibly difficult.
Other complexities include cancellation.
If your thread is cancelled,
you have to clean up.
You have to release any
resources that were allocated.
You have to free any
locks that it was holding.
And cleanup's easy to get wrong.
There's also thread management.
You have to work out how many threads
you need to create in your application.
If you create too many, it's inefficient.
They're fighting with each
other for the CPU resources.
If you create too few of them,
then you've wasted the concurrency
that's available in the machine.
Now, we haven't actually solved any of
these problems in a threaded world.
That's very difficult to do.
But what we have done is help
you identify the work in your
threads through prioritization.
Now, we've had CPU prioritization
for a long time now,
but in Leopard,
we've added two new interfaces
to be able to control file system
activity and networking activity.
So you can mark your thread
as being a background thread,
and all file system activity will take
lower priority compared to other threads,
and all your networking activity
will take lower priority also.
This allows you to distinguish
between your foreground threads,
which are doing, for example,
the user interface,
and the background threads,
which are doing downloads or cache
management or other housekeeping
things in the background.
So that's using threads.
It's a manual process.
You will get the performance out.
It depends on how much work
you want to put into it.
But that's how you get that performance
out of multicores using threads.
So the last one is adopt new APIs.
So we thought a lot about how we
could make this process easier to
get concurrency in your applications
without you having to deal with all
the complexities of using threads.
And we looked around at what were
successful patterns in life to
be able to increase the workflow
and be able to get things moving.
And we discovered the queues.
We were already using queues
in things like run loops.
And it's a very effective mechanism.
So what you need to do
is to take your program,
your application,
and basically do top-down design
kinds of approaches where you take
your long operations and you break
them down into smaller operations
and queue them up to be done.
Now, these work elements can also
generate more work elements
and queue those up as well,
so it's an iterative process.
And we have two new APIs in
Leopard to help you do this,
NSOperation and NSOperationQueue.
So what do these two guys do?
So NSOperation actually
manages your work element.
It gives you information
such as the status,
is this work element running?
And it allows you to specify to
the operating system things like
how parallel this work element is
with the rest of your application,
what the priority of
this work element is,
and what its dependencies are
in case there are several that
you have to do sequentially.
NS Operation Queue is the actual queue
management itself and takes the work
elements and applies them onto a queue.
And this will automatically
fork the threads for you,
the appropriate number of threads,
depending on the hardware configuration
that you're running on and also
the amount of concurrency that
you've specified in your application.
And because this is queue-based,
it fits in with the run loop.
And therefore,
it's a very familiar kind of model.
And so what I'd like to do now is
to show you a little demo about
what you can do with NS Operation.
Okay, this is a demo program.
Basically,
there are two activities going on here,
one of which is drawing a
yellow picture in activity one,
and the other one is drawing a
blue picture in activity two.
And each of these activities has been
broken down into seven work elements.
So let's just start it
and see what goes on.
Now you can see this is just
going on in a strict FIFO order.
We put the work elements on the
queue and they're just being
pulled off and executed one by one,
because we've specified nothing
about the work elements.
So this is a dual core machine,
this iMac.
And so we can specify that actually these
elements can be executed concurrently.
So let's do that.
And of course,
you can now do them two at a time.
Now, you have to remember that
there's nothing changed about
this program from the first one,
except for the fact we've added a bit
in each work element that says that
they can be executed concurrently.
Now I personally think that the
yellow flower should be drawn first.
So what I'm going to do is I'm going
to set this priority on all the yellow
work elements to say that they're
more important than the blue ones.
So let's run that.
And now you can see that we pull
the yellow work elements off
in preference to the blue ones.
And again,
there's been no change to this program
other than the fact that as I put
each work element onto the queue,
we've specified a higher priority
than the blue work elements.
So that's NS Operation Q.
It's a new way of getting concurrency
without all the hard work of threads.
So NS Operations,
you let the OS do the hard part.
And because we're putting all the
concurrency management in the library,
it's applicable across all applications.
And because we're working
with the hardware,
we can future-proof your application
to take advantage of more and more
concurrency as it becomes available,
as long as you specified
that in your work elements.
All you need to do for your
applications is break the work down
into units and hint the OS the amount
of parallelism you can tolerate,
the priority,
and any dependencies that you have.
So that's adopting new APIs.
And we'd really encourage you to
go off and look at NS operation
and NS operation queue.
So it doesn't matter which one
of these options that you choose,
Mac OS X is the best software
platform for being able to take
advantage of multi-cores as
they develop in the industry.
And so I'd like to return to
Bertrand to talk about the next
item of hardware in the system.
Thanks, Simon.
So Simon talked about the CPU,
two aspects that are really
important nowadays for the CPU,
64-bit and multi-core.
But to have a computer,
you need something more than a CPU.
You need at least memory.
[Transcript missing]
So in Leopard,
we are adding garbage collection
to the Objective-C runtime.
What that means is that all
Objective-C objects are collected.
The old release method does nothing.
You can still have it in your code.
And it really integrates well
with kind of the other heaps,
the malloc heap, or even the CF object,
core foundation object,
where you have done
CF retain and CF release.
We use a very modern garbage collector,
one that's generational.
It's not your granddad's kind
of trace and sweep collector.
So generational means that
we take advantage of the
fact that a young object,
when created recently,
tends to go away faster than
the old objects that tend to
sit there pretty much forever.
So very modern garbage collector.
Now, I heard a little bit of clapping.
And so I know that at least
a number of you are really
excited by the convenience,
not having to worry about deallocation,
and that especially.
If you are creating a new application,
that can be great.
OK, forget all these codes.
That's error prone.
But in the back over there,
I saw some folks who
are a little worried.
What is this going to do
to my existing application?
Maybe you've worked with a
garbage collector in the past,
and that wasn't kind of
the best performance.
Maybe you have a real-time application
where you want to very carefully
control the lifetime of your buffers.
So-- Relax.
You can have it both ways.
Garbage collection is opt-in.
We're not changing the
meaning of your existing code.
So what does opt-in mean?
It means that per application,
you can specify with just a flag
whether you want your application
to be garbage collected or not.
And we've made sure all our stack,
all our frameworks, work both ways,
collected or not, which is, I think,
a first from a technology perspective.
So this is a brand new
feature in Objective-C.
And actually, there will be others.
But for that,
you need to go to the next session,
the one after this one.
So that was garbage collection,
Objective-C, a better way to fill
all those memory chips.
Now,
let's move on to a new part of computers.
Actually,
this is something that all modern
computers have and that contributes to
creating an exceptional user experience.
And that's...
[Transcript missing]
Thank you.
Thanks, everybody.
We're using the GPU today as kind
of a metaphor for things we do in
the computer to create cinematic
experiences for our users.
Cinematic experiences are when
the user uses your application
or turns on the computer,
just have a really nice greeting for
them just that they feel right at home
when they're using your application.
My analogy for this is kind of like going
out for a nice meal at a nice restaurant.
You sit down, the lights are right,
the tablecloth is pressed,
the napkin's pressed.
Everything feels great,
even before the meal hits your table.
And so that's really the kind of
impressions you want to create
with a cinematic experience.
And there's a bunch of
ingredients to that experience
that we're going to talk about.
We're going to talk
about computing power.
We've got a lot of computing
power in the platform.
How do we take advantage of that?
We're going to talk
about better algorithms.
As you can tell,
the computing power is coming in
some sort of funky ways at us,
and we've got to figure
out how to use that.
We're going to talk about making
everything easier to program so that
you can take your application to
the next level without kind of going
all the way back to square one.
And we're going to
talk about more pixels,
both in space and time.
Let's talk about more computing power.
So we heard about our new four
burner processors this morning.
But there's another processor
in your box called the GPU.
And the GPU is increasing at a rate of
performance even faster than the CPUs.
In fact, the latest engines are capable
of 10 gigapixels or more
in processing per second.
And it's not just about gigaflops
for the graphics processor.
The graphics processors are
becoming more programmable,
so they're starting to
feel more like a CPU.
They're having more precision,
so they're up to a
floating point precision.
And also a lot more memory bandwidth,
because the memory systems
are closed and not necessarily
expandable on the graphics cards,
they typically have
much greater bandwidth,
50, 60 gigabytes per second even.
But as we saw this morning again,
the multi-core CPUs are
giving it a run for the money,
and they're not going to
go down without a fight.
And so the great thing about this is
this creates this embarrassment of
riches of all this computing power
that we can take advantage to great
cinematic experiences for users.
So the next thing that we want to
talk about is how to take advantage
of all of those processing engines.
As we heard, it's about parallelism.
And one way to think about
parallelism is task parallelism.
Task parallelism is where you
divide work into chunks where,
say, you might have a line chef and an
expediter and someone doing the
appetizers to try to get the throughput
through the kitchen as much as possible.
And so that's a common way to break
down problems on the computer as well.
And we've done that with OpenGL.
And we've even done more
in Leopard with that.
Conventional OpenGL is already a
multi-threaded kind of task parallel
architecture because you've got the CPU,
the application running on
the CPU creating commands,
then being executed by the GPU,
which is actually its own
processing engine as well.
You can think of it as running a thread.
And receiving commands
from the application.
So you already have some concurrency
going with conventional OpenGL.
And what we've done is gone to a
multi-threaded OpenGL engine to
add an extra thread in the middle.
So the application thread can
have a processor all to itself,
call OpenGL, record that,
return immediately,
and then there's one thread whose sole
job it is to take those commands from
the application and keep the GPU fed.
And this results in
tremendous gains for us.
So here's a graph that we made of Doom 3
and World of Warcraft running on the
new machines we announced this morning.
You can see Windows XP.
We can boot it to XP on the left there.
And you can see Mac OS X in the middle
without the multi-threaded engine.
And then on the right,
we have Mac OS X with the
multi-threaded engine.
And you can see we get over a
factor of two in some cases.
And in fact,
World of Warcraft is now faster.
It's a much faster machine on
Mac OS X booted into -- on a Xeon machine
booted into Mac OS X than it is Windows.
And we think that's pretty cool.
So World of Warcraft.
Factor of two faster by
using multi-threaded.
and I've asked Jeff Stahl to come up on
stage and run World of Warcraft for us.
You never know what you're going to see
when you go live into World of Warcraft,
but let's see where we're at.
There's Jeff running around.
You can see we've got a frame meter up on
the right showing the frames per second.
We've got a CPU meter there.
It's taking a little bit over one
CPU right now because World of
Warcraft has some networking,
some audio threads that it's
doing to spread the load as well.
Right now we're in a common
area called the Iron Forge,
which is kind of a meeting area.
You can see a bunch of
characters running around.
And there's Jeff looking
pretty spiffy there.
We've got the world
appearance set to maximum.
And right now with a
multi-threaded engine off,
we're at about 40, 43 frames per second.
Jeff is going to flip a switch,
turn on the multi-threaded engine,
and we'll see what happens.
Frame rate goes up about a
factor of two in frame rate.
And you can see we're using
over two CPUs worth of load,
one three-quarters, two.
So that's really pretty incredible.
Why does frames per
second matter in a game?
Well, you know,
in this scene you're going
faster than monitor refresh,
so it doesn't matter all that much.
But if you get to a more complicated
scene where you've got a high-level
encounter with a lot of folks,
the action's real fast.
You need to be able to respond quickly,
and that's exactly the last time
you want the machine to bog down.
So having a lot of headroom is real
important as the levels get harder.
So I think it's really cool that
we are able to show you this.
To do this in your application,
it's only one line of code.
You just opt in to the
multi-threaded engine,
and you just turn it on real simple.
So, Jeff, why don't you show us what
you think about beating XP on
a multi-threaded machine?
Yeah.
Wait a minute, wait a minute.
Jeff, Jeff, what do you really
think about beating XP?
Yeah, there you go.
All right, say goodbye, Jeff.
All right, thanks.
That's great.
So that's OpenGL running multi-threaded.
There is actually a version of this that
is shipping with the new Xeon machines,
and we'll continue to improve it.
And it's going to be in
Leopard as a standard feature.
So that's great.
So let's talk about another
kind of parallelism,
data parallelism.
So again, back to my food analogy,
you can cook 100 French fries
the same time you cook one.
If you cook each one serially,
it would probably take
a little bit of time.
So French fries to me are like pixels,
so I think of Core Image.
So Core Image is an engine that
does the same thing to a bunch
of pixels at the same time,
and that's exactly what
data parallelism is.
And so Coreism is actually a fairly
general data parallel API for
constructing little kernels of code and
tying them together in order to create
a tree of operations that has to occur
over an image or a bunch of images.
So it's ready for these highly
parallel architectures like GPUs,
multi-core CPUs, et cetera.
And there is-- the capability of running
it both on the CPU or the GPU in order
to take advantage of the parallelism.
It's fully floating point precision,
again,
taking advantage of vector units running
on the CPU and taking advantage of
the floating point GPU capabilities.
And it also has a really important
feature called lazy evaluation.
It doesn't produce pixels
until you really need them.
and Core Image is actually a perfect
match for the explosion in digital
photography that's going on right now.
These cameras generate
megapixels of data,
10, 20 megapixels of data,
a lot of data to process.
And in fact, there's an explosion that
goes on when dealing with raw
camera images in particular.
So if you take a 24
megabyte sensor image,
that's just a 16-bit sample per pixel.
Then you have to reconstruct that and
build the other two channels per pixel,
which is going to explode
that data out to 96 megabytes.
And then if you wanted to adjust that
maybe and save a floating point result,
for example,
that image could be 192 megabytes.
And you probably want to save all
of these because you may want to
go back and you may want to undo.
Of course,
you want to save your original.
So that's a lot of data.
And so the beauty of Core Image when
combined with this kind of
imagery is that you can really
save the rest of the data.
And that's the beauty of Core Image.
So I can create a recipe to create
that purple tinted images and just save
that along with my raw sensor data.
And I've basically got that version of
the image with very little extra cost.
So you could imagine doing this to
a bunch of different variations,
a sepia tone,
a black and white version again.
And I've only paid incrementally for
another recipe for each of these.
So that's a real powerful concept
about how to use parallel processing
to kind of do things on the fly and not
have to always save out intermediates.
And we use this in the Aperture product,
which was released at
the end of last year,
redefining kind of how to do
digital photography by creating
these variations of images very
cheaply by just sort of saving the
recipe rather than the actual bits.
So Nu and Leopard were exposing the raw
reconstruction via a core image filter.
So raw is totally integrated
with the core image pipeline.
You have control over the details
of taking that sensor data and
converting it into an exposed image.
You can control the exposure,
the temperature, and the tint.
And I'm going to give you
a demo of that right now.
So here I have an image that's
shot a little bit overexposed,
as you can see.
And so up here on the right-hand side,
I've got two blocks.
I've got an imagery construction block,
which is controlling the sensor decoding.
And I've got an image effects block to
add some additional artistic effects.
So let's try to get this image to expose.
So I'm going to move the
exposure slider down.
So a core image is--
working to reconstruct the image with
a little bit less of an exposure.
You can see since it's
dealing with the raw,
it's getting some detail back
in from the highlights where the
sensors were getting saturated.
So we're able to pull detail
down in from the highlights
by using the raw sensor data.
I can also change the color temperature
or I can pick an area from the
image that I want to be neutral.
So I get the image
exposed the way I want it,
then I can enable artistic
effects like this is an Edgework
filter that's in core image where
I can change the radius of that.
So this whole processing pipeline,
both the reconstruction and
the effect is all put together,
globally optimized as one big
GPU thing and GPU expression.
And I'm going all the way from
the sensor data to the final
image in one computation.
And I can turn everything
off and see where I get to.
So that's the new raw
features in core image.
So the next thing I want to talk about
is making things easier to program.
Ease of use is kind of about
quality and convenience.
I mean, you wouldn't necessarily
go bake your own bread,
but you're glad there are people
that know how to do that really well.
And so you can buy nice bread
and you can buy nice greens.
And so as we develop APIs,
we really want to have them out of the
box be very useful for you and something
you can build your solutions on top of.
And so core animation,
something we're introducing this year,
something we're talking about
as a very easy to use API.
And one thing we've found while
working with the development teams,
both you guys and people
internal at Apple,
is developing layered animated
user interfaces and user
experiences is really very hard.
Usually the first thing you
need to do is learn OpenGL.
OpenGL is a great API,
but it is fairly low
level and sophisticated.
And if you just want to
draw an image on the screen,
perhaps not the best API to use for that.
Then you need to go manage
some timers and threads.
Maybe you start out doing your animation
in your main run loop and you realize
that doesn't really work very well.
So you spawn off a thread.
Now you've got all these concurrency
issues that Simon was talking
about that you have to deal with.
And now you have another
problem with when you're
animating the user presentation,
you have to decide what's
the truth as far as the
application logic is concerned.
If I say, is an item in the scene
or not in the scene?
And that's kind of a binary thing as
far as an application is concerned.
That object's there or it's not.
But in the view,
that may be in the process of animating
off because you told it to go away.
Maybe in the process of animating
on because you told it to come on.
And so you need to manage this
discrepancy between the data
structures representing what the user
is seeing at any instant and what
the application logic is thinking.
What menu am I on?
What images are in the scene?
And so that can be really hard.
And there's usually replicated data
structures with lots of concurrency
and locking going on to handle that.
And then usually you have to manage
layout for different sizes if you're
different size of display or different
size of final rendered image,
like 4 by 3 for TV or 16 by 9 for HD.
You want to make sure things stay on
the left where they need to and stay
on the right in the top and the bottom,
et cetera.
And that layout code is just
something that you have to write.
And if you're starting from OpenGL,
from the baseline,
you don't have the tool kits necessary
like Cocoa to handle layout for you.
And then you have to fix all
the bugs in all that code.
And this is usually where my
team gets a phone call just
before some big keynote saying,
we're using OpenGL.
We've got multiple threads going.
And how do we get out of it?
And it's really tricky.
It's really tricky.
And so core animation-- and again,
this is just the rendering code.
You haven't even written
any application code yet.
So we really want you guys to
worry about your application code.
And so core animation is the answer
to get you to have dynamic user
interfaces with very little work.
So behind the scenes,
this is a dynamic layering engine
with automatic property animation.
You can just set a property,
and it will animate to it.
It's media agnostic.
You can have 2D, 3D, graphics, video,
whatever you want on a layer.
It has an asynchronous rendering
thread that's actually running
at vertical retrace intervals
and drawing the scene for you.
So you don't have to worry about that.
It's always ready.
responsive.
[Transcript missing]
So you just need to specify the goal
state in your application logic,
and the animation will
begin asynchronously and
attain your target goal.
Now, if you need to change your mind
because the user pressed another key,
you can still change the model state,
and the animation engine will
then reacquire that new goal and
start animating towards that.
There's also a batched transaction
model if you want to do multiple things.
I don't show transaction here
because there's an implicit
transaction around every event.
So suppose I wanted to do things,
set the opacity to zero of both
the blue and the green layers.
I can do that once through my run loop,
then things will start to animate away.
If I want to do something
a little more complicated,
like say, take the blue layer and set its
opacity to zero so it fades out,
set its size to zero so it shrinks,
and take the green layer and
send it off to the right,
I can do that just by
executing that code.
So let me give you a demo.
You saw one this morning.
I will give you a little
bit of a different one.
It's going to be in the same app, though.
I have the executive version.
So we'll go through the first couple
of camera moves here until we get here.
And I'll bring up my little menuing
system that I happen to have.
And this menuing system is all
done in core animation as well.
I can move forward and backwards.
I'll show you a little bit about
the acquiring new goal states.
If I hold down the infamous
Shift key and move to the next menu,
you can see if I change
my mind halfway through,
it will acquire the new
state kind of on the fly.
And that's just automatic.
The application code is just
setting which menu is current.
So what did I want to show you here?
Well, I wanted to show you the cityscape.
and I've got some preset camera
views that I can show here.
So here's the city all built.
The city actually builds
[Transcript missing]
Another one is the folding building.
The folding building is over here.
He builds like that,
which is kind of cool.
Again,
if I move back a little and run that,
I can show you the city while
the folding building builds.
You can see the guys
come in here at the end.
What else did I want to show?
We said we could show video on a plane,
but no one's actually proven that yet,
so let me prove that to you.
I'll go back to one of the outtake modes
we didn't use in this morning's demo,
but it's called Huge.
It's just like a big
plane of your album art,
and you can select in,
and you can see now I do have
some video on some layers here.
There should be audio on this,
but I don't know if they've turned it up.
You can see I can move around.
Take control of the camera,
kind of show it zooming out.
Another view we had was the panel's view.
The panel's view was like
a bunch of playlists in 3D,
kind of each with a little
screen saver running on them,
and that's kind of fun
to move around as well.
And then finally,
I'll show you the city back with the
... some video on some textures here.
That's kind of fun.
So that's a little bit behind
the scenes on the core animation
demo from this morning.
So there's going to be sessions on that,
so I think in the big hall here,
so please go to those
and get much more detail.
The other thing we're
doing with core animation,
which is really important to us,
is doing full integration
up the Cocoa stack.
So core animation is backed
by a layering engine,
which actually is hierarchical in
the same way NSView hierarchy is.
And so in Leopard,
you're able to back an NSView hierarchy
by a hierarchy of layers that
are built with core animation.
So that's really exciting.
And that allows you not only to have 2D,
3D graphics and video on layers,
but Aqua controls as well
with full interactivity,
and that's great.
And it's all built into
the new interface builder.
And to give you a look at that,
I'd like to invite Andreas Wendker
up to the stage to give you a demo.
Thanks.
Thank you.
As Peter just explained,
we are building core animation
capabilities right in our
Cocoa frameworks into the
new Leopard interface builder,
so that you can easily take
advantage of hardware acceleration
and implicit animations.
I'd like to show you an example of that.
What you see here is a very
simple photo viewer application.
This application is hooked up to a core
data database that contains the pictures
you currently see here in the window.
The pictures themselves are displayed
in a new class of view that we are
adding to the Cocoa frameworks.
The end is grid view.
And the content of this grid view is
populated through a binding to the array
of pictures loaded from the database.
So since it's using a binding,
the grid view will automatically reflect
any changes in the underlying array.
For example, if you reorder the pictures.
To demonstrate that to you,
I added a button to my application
that will randomly reshuffle
the pictures in the array.
Let me show you how the
grid view reacts to that.
So as you can see, instead of immediately
jumping to the new state,
the GridView will actually react with
an implicit animation to it and smoothly
slide the pictures into the new space.
Let me do this again,
this time sorting by
name of the pictures.
And I added a button to slow down
the animations just so that you
can see better what's going on.
And let me turn around the order
of the pictures in the array.
Oh, and of course,
since this is a core data application,
I can also undo this change.
Actually, I can't.
That's because I didn't
make a change here.
Sorry.
Of course,
I can go ahead and rename a picture
just by clicking here in the grid view.
And as you can see,
since we're using bindings again,
Since we're using bindings again,
the name change will result
in an automatic reordering
of the pictures in the array.
And again,
the grid will react with animation.
And now I can undo.
There we go.
So let me show you how
this application is built.
Here's the project in Xcode.
All you find in this project is
a very simple core data model,
which as you can see just
contains a simple entity.
And you also find about
100 lines of code.
This code deals directly with any
of the view animations you saw.
This is just the standard code
you pretty much find in any
Core Data Template application.
It's just the code to
set up the database,
to configure the undo manager,
and other things.
The only code I had to add myself to this
application is the code that randomly
reshuffles the pictures in the array.
So the entire behavior of the user
interface is defined in the Nib file.
Let me open that up for you
in the new interface builder.
The large black area you see
here is the Andes grid view,
which of course is empty
here in interface builder.
Now the grid view is a
completely generic type of view.
It's not specialized
in displaying photos.
In fact, it can display arbitrary
types of objects.
And to tell the grid view
how to display these objects,
it allows you to combine
regular NS controls,
things like text fields, buttons,
sliders, and little compound views that
become the prototype for each of the
elements displayed in the grid view.
I know it's going to be hard to see
here on the screen because of the color
and transparency settings I'm using,
but here's the little compound view
that becomes the prototype for all
the little pictures in my view.
Now let me go ahead and extend the
functionality of my application
by adding filtering to it.
For that,
I'm going to go into the library
window of Interface Builder.
The library window contains all the
objects I can add to my Nib file,
and it's one of the cool new features
we added to the new interface builder.
As you can see,
it's organized in a hierarchy of groups.
Right now I have the entire
Cocoa group selected,
but I can also drill down and
just look at the comment controls,
or maybe what we call the extra controls,
or maybe look at both of
them at the same time.
And yes, you might have guessed it,
we are using a grid view here
in the library window too.
Another great feature we added to the
new interface builder is the ability
to edit toolbars right in the Nib file.
So I can just take a search
field out of my library,
drag it into my toolbar,
make it part of the default
set of items in the toolbar.
Now all I have to do is set up
a binding from the search field
to the array controller in my
Nib file to configure the filter.
Let me go ahead and do that.
I'm going to configure the bindings
so that it filters in a case-intensive
way on the name of the picture.
That's all I have to do.
So I'm done here.
Save the Nib file.
Go back to Xcode, build and run.
So here's my application again.
I can still reorder the pictures,
of course.
Now I can also filter, for example,
everything with an S.
Let me slow this down for you.
So that's just one simple example
of how you can make use of core
animation when it's built right
into Cocoa and interface builder.
We hope that you will make
extensive use of this.
Thank you.
Great.
Thanks, Andreas.
Very cool stuff.
The thing I like about that
demo is it really doesn't have
anything to do with animation.
I mean, it's really just about the
data and about the application,
and the fluid user experience
just happens implicitly.
So I think that's really cool.
So let's talk about pixels, more pixels.
So we've got these great
big 30-inch displays now,
which is great.
And so there's kind of a
real estate boom going on,
right?
We've got lots of windows open.
We can be real productive
in our big screens.
But what happens if we were to increase
the density to 200 DPI on these displays?
Well, maybe it's a little bit
too much of a good thing.
Can't quite see what I'm doing.
My icons are real small.
My text is real small.
So what are we going to do about that?
The solution is pretty obvious--
resolution-independent user interface.
So more pixels can provide more detail.
So if you have a 200 DPI monitor,
wouldn't it be great if it looked
just like the 100 DPI monitor,
except if you zoom in,
instead of being faced
with this at 100 DPI,
you could have something like that.
[Transcript missing]
So what do you have to do?
Well, avoid Quick Draw.
We've been saying it for a while.
This is now a great time to go
get rid of those last vestiges of
Quick Draw in your applications.
Provide high resolution artwork.
Again, those 512 by 512 icons.
Or consider using, say,
PDF for some icons if they're fairly
easily represented by vectors.
Test with Quartz debug.
This has been in the
release for a little while.
Be able to set the user interface
resolution and run your app.
And we're asking applications
to be ready by 2008.
That's when we expect to be ready.
So that's more pixels.
So these are the ingredients
of our cinematic experience.
But why do we sort of do all of this?
Well, the answer is, again,
in the nice restaurant,
the food is presented to you.
If it looks great,
before you even take a bite of it,
you know it's going to be good.
And so we have a lot of tools that
we've presented to you for doing great,
gorgeous user interfaces.
So even before the user
starts typing in your app,
or when they pick up that
icon and drag it around,
everything just looks and feels
like you spent a lot of time.
Each attention to detail is a
little message to your user,
saying that you care about them,
and you're going to give
them a great experience.
So that's our trip through GPU land,
using cinematic
experiences as a metaphor.
And we're going to go back to
our tour of hardware and software
integration with Scott Forstall.
Thanks very much.
Okay, let's see what I get to talk about.
The magical mosaic says cameras.
So as you know,
we've been building cameras into
almost all of our new machines.
And for the machines where
we don't build a camera in,
we provide the EyeSight,
which you can go ahead and add as well.
One of the first things we
do when you get your new
machine is take your mug shot.
And we use this picture as
your login window picture.
Once you've logged in,
we use it in the address book.
Now let's say you don't
like your mugshot.
We have a picture taker panel
where you can take a new picture.
Much better.
So we're using this picture taker panel,
both in the address book.
We're using it in system preferences.
We're using it in iChat
for your buddy list.
So we're using it all over the place.
So we decided to make it
a public API for Leopard.
This does not come
complete with Nick Nolte.
So the Picture Taker panel allows
you to take picture snapshots.
It's a consistent UI throughout the OS.
You can use it everywhere.
It has the automatic flash
to fill in highlights.
Once you take your picture,
you can zoom it, you can crop it,
you can rotate it.
And really importantly,
we handle the camera state for you.
This is especially important
for an external eyesight.
We handle whether or not
the iris is open or closed.
We handle whether or not the
person unplugs the cable.
So you just call the panel.
We return you a picture
once they're happy with it.
That's the Picture Taker panel.
Next, of course the most fun way to
take pictures is with Photo Booth.
We are bundling Photo Booth in Leopard.
It's fun because of all
these crazy effects.
I know my kids play with it for hours.
In Leopard we're actually opening
it up so you can create your own
effects which Photo Booth will
pick up and you can use as well.
Just create a quartz composition,
put it on the system
and we'll pick it up.
That's Photo Booth.
Now our cameras are really
good not just for still photos,
but also for capturing video.
We use this in QuickTime Player,
so with QuickTime Pro you
can capture video.
Of course iMovie allows you to capture
video straight from the eyesight.
And we use it in iChats,
video conferencing to capture video,
and now in Leopard we also apply
fun effects to those as well.
So to make it as easy as possible
for all of you to take advantage
of all the built-in cameras,
we're going to make it easy,
we're adding a new API called
the QtKit Capture APIs.
The Qt Kit Capture APIs are an
absolute pro-grade solution.
They are meant to support everything from
the highest end professional applications
down to a consumer application.
They give you frame accurate AV sync.
So it syncs the frame
with the audio perfectly.
We support both the internal and
the external eye sights and a
host of other cameras as well.
We allow you to capture
directly to a file.
You can capture to a stream.
We have a really nice on-screen preview,
so you can see the video
as it's being captured.
And this whole thing integrates
in with the OpenGL pipeline,
so you can do what you want
with the video as it comes in.
So that's the Qticket Capture APIs.
Now in Leopard,
we took iChat one step further and
added sort of a virtual camera in
this thing we call iChat Theater.
And iChat Theater allows you to plug
an application in to a video conference
and present it across the conference.
So in this case,
we've already plugged in iPhoto,
so you can do an iPhoto
slideshow across the web.
We've plugged in Keynote,
so you can do Keynote
presentations as well,
and even QuickTime Player.
But we've done iChat
Theater in a public way.
There's a set of APIs,
so you can plug your
applications into it as well.
The way you do this is you
take and register with the
instant message framework.
That is the iChat framework.
Your application
controls all the content.
So you control when you start playing,
when you stop, any transitions.
You control all the content.
You'll get a series of callbacks.
In each callback,
you render a single frame of the
animation into a core video buffer,
and there's several of those.
You use core audio to provide the audio,
and then you're done.
We'll go ahead, we'll 264 encode it,
we'll worry about latency issues,
we'll get it across the wire,
and display it on the other side.
So you just get a series of callbacks,
provide the content, and you're done.
That is iChat Theater.
We're doing a lot with cameras,
but when I look at it,
I think we're just still scratching
the surface of what we can do.
Cameras to me are a lot
like a keyboard or a mouse.
It's just another input device.
And the camera's becoming a more
and more ubiquitous input device,
and it's really high bandwidth.
There's a lot we can do.
So I actually have been looking at a
number of applications that you've been
writing that I think are really cool.
Here's one.
It's called EvoCam.
It's a video baby monitor.
There's a Delicious Library.
Delicious Library uses the camera
to scan the barcodes of books
and DVDs and movies and CDs and
automatically add it to your library.
There's this thing called I Alert You.
It's a security device for your computer.
So let's say you have your MacBook,
you're at the cafe,
you walk away to get some more coffee,
and some criminal comes and
screws with your machine.
You could light his breath on fire.
It'll actually take a picture of them.
And so you come back,
you find out who screwed with it.
If he steals your machine,
it actually in the future is
going to email you his picture,
so you can go track him down in Malibu.
So that's iAlertU.
There's iStopMotion.
iStopMotion will let you
be the next Nick Park.
You can create Wallace and Gromit.
It's great.
It allows you to create stop motion
movies by sort of translucently putting
the last frame over the next one.
You can watch it as you
do your manipulations.
And there's this thing called ToySight.
ToySight's the best way to have fun
and exercise and look very silly.
The camera watches where your
hands are and basically puts
virtual controls into the air.
And as you move your hands around,
it tracks them and you're
actually controlling the game.
So that's ToySight.
So we're bringing the cameras
to almost all of our machines.
We're bringing more and more APIs,
especially in Leopard,
to make it really easy for you to
take advantage of these cameras.
I can't wait to see more and
more applications of yours that
take advantage of the camera.
And that is the camera.
Next.
OhMysteriousMosaic.
Hard drive, sweet.
Not for the sexiest part of the demo.
The hard drive.
A few days ago,
I was comparing the original Mac to
our current standard 20-inch iMac.
And I was comparing it on
three different aspects:
the CPU speed, the amount of RAM,
and the size of the hard drive.
You look at CPU speed.
The original one was
an 8 megahertz 68,000.
Currently we're at 2 gigahertz.
So just on clock speed alone,
it's 250 times faster, right?
There's a lot of other things,
but on clock speed alone.
You look at RAM, it was 128 kilobytes,
non-upgradable.
It was an appliance.
It was perfect.
And the new one ships
512 megabytes standard.
So that's 4,000 times larger.
But if you look at the hard drive size,
it actually blows all this away.
We go from a 400 kilobyte removable
disk to a standard 250 gigabyte drive,
which is 625,000 times larger.
And yet it's still full.
So with these large drives,
we are filling it up with
lots and lots of content.
And once you have all this content,
there's two things you want to do.
The first thing you want to do
is find what you're looking for,
and that's what Spotlight's about.
And the second thing you want
to do is preserve what you have,
and that's what Time Machine's all about.
So let's start with Spotlight.
Spotlight's great because it allows you
to very quickly search and find anything
you're looking for on your machine.
You can search by both file name,
but also metadata and contents.
And the way we do that is we provide a
whole set of Spotlight importer plug-ins.
These understand the file types,
they read it in,
and they hand the metadata
and the contents to Spotlight,
which does an index of it.
But we still hear from people that
there are certain file types where
you can't search them in Spotlight
based on metadata or contents.
And that's because it's a proprietary
file format that we don't have access to.
So if you're creating those,
please write a Spotlight
importer plug-in.
We try to make this
as simple as possible.
There's one API.
You already have the code
that parses your file.
We even give you an Xcode project.
So please write in
Spotlight importer plug-in,
and then people will be able
to search for your files.
Once you've written the plug-in,
the best place to distribute it is
right inside your application package.
If you put it in the application,
you can search for your files.
So you can see that you've
got the same package that when
people get your application,
they can immediately search for all
of your file types on their machine.
Also, tell us about it.
We'll put it on our website.
We have over 50 Spotlight
importer plug-ins on our website
that people can download.
So tell us about it as well.
So once you've done that,
now we want to make sure that
we're preserving all this metadata.
When you have a file that
has all this great metadata,
and we're getting more
and more as time goes by,
you want to make sure
when you save the file,
you don't lose the metadata.
There's some metadata that
you don't even know about.
It's Finder contents, ACLs,
there's a bunch of things on there
that you might not even know about.
So we asked you this last year,
but now we're going to
make it easy for you.
We're adding a new API.
It's called the Replace Object API.
It is a safe save API.
What you do is take,
save your new file on the side,
call Replace Object, it will replace it
with the original file,
preserving exactly the
metadata you want to preserve.
So when you change the file and save it,
you'll preserve all the metadata.
It's the Replace Object API.
Thank you.
Okay, this next spotlight feature is
for the excessively lazy of us,
myself included.
Let's say you're sitting at home,
in the living room, on the couch,
working on your MacBook.
And you're looking for a file,
but it's not on that machine.
It might be on the
machine that's upstairs.
It might be on the machine
that's over in the den.
But you don't want the owner's burden of
walking upstairs to look for the file.
You'd like to sit on your
butt and do the search of the
other machines in the house.
And in Leopard,
we are encouraging couch potatoes.
We are providing that.
So you can sit with
Spotlight on the couch,
do this search with Spotlight of all
the other machines in your house.
It'll find it.
And then using personal file sharing,
you can open it up,
never leaving your butt.
So that's our feature,
searching other machines.
Next, quick look.
Quick look does a few
things for us in Leopard.
When you look in icon view in the finder,
you find a bunch of generic icons.
The icon tells you what
type of file it is,
but tells you nothing about the contents.
We actually have a feature
called show icon previews,
and that will turn a few of
those icons into rich previews.
The quick look APIs in Leopard allow
you to write a plug-in to support
rich icon previews for everything.
So please write one of these.
for your file types.
Now we took it a step
beyond this as well.
When you're in Spotlight,
you can also use Quick Look to show a
quick preview of the entire document.
So you can quickly see,
is that the photo I'm looking for?
It works for other things like movies,
so you can quickly look
at a quick time movie.
You can even look at presentations.
So you can pull up, quickly look,
see if that's the right presentation,
and then open it.
It works both for Spotlight
and it works in the Finder.
So if you're in the Finder,
you can quickly get a preview.
But most importantly,
this is the way you can get
previews in Time Machine.
So again, if you have a document type,
write one of these plug-ins so we
can look and see your document when
going through time with Time Machine.
That is Quick Look.
Thank you.
So another thing we've done for
Spotlight is added Spotlight to Help.
When you look at Spotlight,
one of the really good things about
it is there's this menu right there.
You can type into a search field
and quickly see your results.
And we've decided to do that exact same
thing for the Help system in Leopard.
So let's say I'm in text edit
working on some document.
And I want to set what the default
font size is of a new document.
I can go up, click on the Help menu,
and there's a search field.
Zoom that in.
type of search in there and it shows
you the help topics right there.
You can choose one, it pops open,
help you right to the right spot.
But you know,
once we did this we realized
we can spotlight search more
than just the help contents,
but we can spotlight
index part of your UI,
your menus and other parts of your app.
So let me go ahead and show you that now.
So here we are.
Let me bring up a Pages document.
And I have a delicious
cookie in the document,
which I'd like to center.
And I don't remember how
to center items in Pages.
So I can click on the Help menu,
just type Center, and boom,
here's Aligning Objects.
It's a really quick way to find exactly
the help topic you're looking for.
But better than that, I can actually
Arrow through these menu items,
we pop up the menu,
even if it's a submenu,
telling you exactly the item you want.
I find a line object center,
I hit return, boom,
the cookie's centered.
This is especially useful
with pro applications that
have lots and lots of menus.
So this is an unchanged Photoshop.
I go up here, and I want to change the
contrast of this image.
Type contrast.
Boom.
Go through here.
Yep.
Here we turn.
Brings up the panel.
Change my contrast.
Much better.
Done.
Just like that.
So that's Spotlight.
We're doing a lot with
Spotlight in Leopard.
Once you have the contents,
let's preserve it.
That's what Time Machine is all about.
As you heard this morning,
Time Machine is absolutely the best
way to automatically backup your Mac.
If you change a file,
we automatically backup the file.
We backup everything.
We backup all the files.
We backup your photos, your music,
everything, applications, the entire OS.
We allow you to restore everything.
So if you lose your hard drive,
someone even steals your
machine or the hard drive dies,
you can buy a new hard drive,
replace it in there,
and be exactly where you were
before that hard drive died.
You can restore a la carte,
so you can go and restore a
single file if you'd like.
You can back up to a
hard drive or a server.
And of course,
it allows you to go back in time.
So I've had a lot of
questions since this morning.
How the heck do we go back in time?
So let me go ahead and show
you how time and space work.
We start with the entire file tree,
the entire file hierarchy of your volume.
And conceptually, as changes are made,
we make a complete backup of that
entire file tree for all the changes.
Conceptually this is what we do.
We don't actually copy every
file every few minutes,
but conceptually we have complete file
tree hierarchies for every snapshot.
These snapshots are all read-only,
so you don't accidentally delete it.
And in fact, they all just use journaled
HFS+. So we haven't created a
whole new file system format.
We use the standard one that
we already use and invest in.
And in fact,
you can look at these snapshots
all the way back to Jaguar.
Of course,
Leopard has a really nice UI on it,
but it's a standard file system.
So for each of these snapshots,
the way it works is like when
the finder wants to show today,
we point the finder at the entire file
system hierarchy as it stands today.
So it shows you exactly
what you have today.
When we take the finder
back in time one day,
we just point it to the root of the tree
of the file system as it stood yesterday.
Because we have an entire file
system tree as it stood yesterday.
So it shows the files there.
Now,
that file is an image that I imported two
days ago and hadn't rotated two days ago.
So when I go back two days,
the finder shows it not yet
rotated because it's just
looking at that file system.
It's not doing anything magic.
We just point it at the entire file
system as it stood two days ago.
Now, this works with more
than just the finder.
It works with your apps.
It also works with things
like the address book.
So the way this works with the
address book is the address
book points exactly at its own
database within this file system.
So when the address book is
asked to go back to yesterday,
when I think I hadn't
entered Sonia's address,
The address disappears from the card
because the address book is merely
showing us its database that it knows how
to read exactly as it stood yesterday.
And if we go back two days
before that card even existed,
again, it doesn't appear in the
address book because it's
just looking at its database.
So the app doesn't need to know about
how we do snapshots or anything else.
It just needs to know about how it
reads its own database or its own files,
and we point it exactly to a
snapshot of that as it stood in time.
Now here's the way we
actually do the snapshots.
We start with the entire file system
and the first backup is complete.
The first backup to the
hard drive of the server,
we copy every single file over.
So now you have a complete snapshot.
We have a low priority daemon,
backup daemon,
which is listening for changes.
When a change happens,
like this file here rotates,
an event goes out.
It's called an FS event and it's a new
file system notification in Leopard.
Our daemon listens to these changes.
Now every once in a while,
and right now it's about every hour,
the daemon will coalesce all the changes
that have happened and make a snapshot.
It takes everything which hasn't
changed at all and it creates
a series of hard links to it,
which takes virtually
no space whatsoever.
In fact,
we have even tricks on top of the
normal hard links to make it so
it takes hardly any space at all.
And then for the file that has changed,
that gets copied over to the backup.
So now you add a file again, an hour,
you know, a few minutes later,
an hour goes by.
We go ahead and copy that file
into a new backup where all
the rest of that backup tree is
is just a series of hard
links taking no space.
Now once a day, we coalesce all of
those backups into one,
and so you have a snapshot
per day going back in time.
So that's the way it works.
So one way we're saving space
here is by using hard links.
Another way we save space is
by just not backing up things
that don't need to be backed up.
For instance--
If we're in Safari browsing the web,
this is what our file system looks like.
We have a cache for the
current page you're on.
Actually,
we have a cache for a number of pages.
If you're in Google, you do a search,
you go to another page,
we have another cache page there.
You download a file,
it goes to your desktop,
we have a file for that.
So instead of just taking
and backing up all of this,
there's no reason for us to back up
any of these cache files over here.
And so we have ways,
there's an API for you to
mark things as cache files or
as not-to-be-backed-up files,
and then we won't back them up,
saving a lot of space.
So there's really two
ways for you to do this.
One is to use the API and mark
files not to be backed up.
The other is to put files
into standard locations.
So if it's a temporary file,
put it in the slash temp.
If it's a cache file, we actually have a
standard cache location.
So please put it into
the standard location.
If you get only one.
So if you get only one thing out of this
part of the talk about Time Machine,
mark your files that don't
need to be backed up as such,
which will enable backup devices to
store farther and farther back in time.
There's another type of file that you
should mark as not-to-be-backed-up.
And those are, if you have an index file,
it's not a cache,
it's not a temporary file,
but it's an index file that
can be regenerated by the
other data files that you have.
Mark that as well, not-to-be-backed-up.
Because if we went back in time,
you could just regenerate it instead.
All right.
That is Time Machine.
We think it's absolutely the
best way to preserve your data,
to go back in time, and grab it back.
And we think in Leopard,
with all the great content
we have on our machines,
we have really good solutions for
both finding that content and for
preserving that content on these
increasingly large hard drives.
For the next section,
I'd like to turn it back to Bertrand.
So we've talked about lots of
different parts of a computer.
Now let's talk about entire computers.
Let's talk about the server.
Our servers find their way
in a lot of different places.
They are present in some
of the top supercomputers.
You find them in small department
servers or small enterprises.
You find them on the campus of higher
ed or in some elementary schools.
To span this really broad use of servers,
we need to make our server easy to use,
powerful, and we need to provide a
rich collection of services.
So let me go in a turn on
each of those three aspects.
Ease of use, of course, right?
And we've made the Leopard
server even easier to use.
We're adding a number of applications and
polishing the applications that we have.
So we're adding a number of
applications and polishing
the applications that we have.
So two I want to mention is one is a
server assistant that right off the
bat will ask a few questions on how
you want your server to be set up.
And it will set up your server
just based on those few questions.
It will also set up the network so
that when you bring in a new machine,
automatically your machine will
participate into the network.
We also have a new server preferences
that's very similar to the system
preferences that you find on the client.
So the big difference is that
it sets up the settings for a
whole bunch of machines at once.
Now, in terms of the power, of course,
the power derives from Unix.
Unix powers the internet.
It powers most of the servers
that you find on the internet.
And all the benefits that we talked
about for the client are present,
obviously, on the server because we
are using the same kernel.
So you have 64-bit processes.
You have SMP processes.
And we will recompile all the
server services in 64-bit mode
as well as tune them for SMP in
the Leopard Server product.
Now, another important aspect of
Unix is that it's open source.
Everything we do at the
Unix layer is open source.
And by the way,
we'll be posting the sources of our
kernel both for PowerPC and for Intel.
Now, at the same time,
OpenShorts is kind of a two-way
thing with the community,
and we are selecting the best
packages that are available,
whether it's commands, libraries,
services, whatever,
and adding them to the server.
We have a couple hundred
of those services.
Now, with those kind of bricks,
we make high-level services,
which brings me to my third point,
which is a rich collection
of high-level services.
We have a pretty good
collection in Tiger.
All the basic high-level
services are covered,
but we're adding more for Leopard.
We're adding a calendar server that,
of course, matches iCal.
It's based on the CalDAF protocol,
all industry standard protocols.
We're adding a server that
corresponds to Time Machine,
a backup server.
We're adding, of course,
the Spotlight server that
Scott just mentioned.
We're adding a number of
collaboration servers to do wikis,
blogs, to produce podcasts.
And we are bundling Ruby on Rails.
Ruby is a very trending language.
So the way we conceive of the server is
that it complements nicely the client.
Now we don't do that by any
kind of monopolistic tie-in.
We do that by just using standards,
just open standards, industry standards.
So this is the basic
strategy for the server.
This will be talked, of course,
a lot more in the session after this.
It's about ease of use, about power,
and about a rich collection of services.
All this you will find in Leopard Server.
And of course, Leopard Server runs great
on the latest machines that
we've announced this morning,
whether it's a Mac Pro or the new XServe.
So this concludes the little promenade
we've had through hardware and software
and the integration of the two.
Now, why do we do integration
of hardware and software?
And of course,
it's to bring the ultimate user
experience to our collective users.
But it has another important aspect.
It lets us create an ideal development
platform for you guys to build upon.
Why?
Because by integrating
together hardware and software,
we can bring technologies
to market faster.
We also insulate you from all
the details of the hardware.
So for example, you don't have to learn
how to program a GPU.
And it's tricky.
There's a lot of tricky stuff there.
And we protect you from
all that with low-level
frameworks and even higher-level
frameworks like Core Animation.
We also provide a dependable baseline,
both software and the hardware.
So you can count on having
a camera on most Macs,
and you can have innovative
applications that use that.
So we believe that Leopard is the
ideal platform for innovation.
This is a theme that we've
had in previous years.
This is a part of our mission,
and that doesn't change.
We want to create this great
platform on which you can develop
great applications like these ones.
Now, one final thought.
Over the years, what makes a great
application has changed.
It used to be that all you needed is this
idea of doing something that was useful,
that hadn't been done before.
It was all based on function.
And with the advent of the Macintosh,
of course, things changed.
Now you had to think in
terms of ease of use.
It was no longer sufficient
to have a useful application.
It had to be easy to use.
You had to think in terms of
making it fun for the end users
to interact with the application.
I think what has happened over
the last few years is that
we've entered into a new stage.
Now you must provide a wow factor.
You must amaze your users.
And I think you'll agree that this
is something we've done with backup.
I think this is really important.
I think this is the future.
And I look forward to lots of
your innovative applications.
Thank you.